how come some insects are able to walk
on the surface of a pond but you quickly
sink to the bottom when you try to walk
on water and why the lakes freeze from
the top down in winter in a word the
answer to all these questions is
polarity water is a simple molecule made
up of one oxygen atom and two hydrogen
atoms but it is essential to life in
fact water makes up approximately 60% of
the adult human beings body weight the
polarity within those water molecules
gives this common substance the
properties that make it unique and
life-sustaining polarity refers to the
unequal sharing of electrons within a
molecule for water the bonding between
the oxygen atom and two hydrogen atoms
within a single water molecule is like a
tug-of-war between a big strong football
player and a cute little toddler oxygen
is a larger atom with more protons in
its nucleus than hydrogen these positive
charges are like a person's physical
strength they are able to attract the
negatively charged electrons in the bond
just like a strong individual is able to
overpower a weaker individual in a
tug-of-war so oxygen is able to attract
more than its fair share of electrons
because hydrogen is smaller and has less
strength or fewer protons it loses a
tug-of-war and attracts fewer than its
fair share of electrons so the oxygen
and water behaves as though it's
negative and the hydrogen's behave as
though they're positive the bonds within
a single water molecule are called polar
covalent bonds covalent means that the
electrons are shared but as we just
learned polar means that these electrons
are not shared equally in water the
oxygen acts negative and the hydrogen's
act positive since negative and positive
attract that oxygen is attracted to the
hydrogen atoms in neighboring water
molecules a special type of bond forms
between water molecules known as a
hydrogen bond hydrogen bonds don't just
happen in water either they can form
between a water molecule and different
substances that are polar or
waters ability to stick to itself is
called cohesion while waters ability to
stick to other substances is called
adhesion now think back to the initial
questions first why are some insects
able to walk on water surface tension
due to hydrogen bonding creates a thin
film on the surface of water that gives
enough resistance for super-late insects
to walk on you can't walk on it because
the hydrogen bonds aren't strong enough
to hold you up
why does ice float on top of liquid
water for most other substances the
solid state is more dense than the
liquid state but that is not the case
for water hydrogen bonds keep water
molecules farther apart in frozen water
than in liquid water the farther apart
the molecules are the less dense that
solid is so ice is about 9% less dense
than water which means it floats on the
top that's why lakes freeze from the top
down and aquatic life is able to survive
through a cold winter every year it is
the polarity of the water molecule and
the resulting hydrogen bonding that
account for waters unique properties so
the reason that water is so special from
inside your cells to the world's oceans
is simply because it is a polar molecule
you